[MUSIC PLAYING]
[APPLAUSE]
ANITA SANCHEZ: Welcome,
all my precious relations.
As Sarah told you, I wake up for
22 and 1/2 years every morning
as the Earth turns, so that
I can see the sun and receive
the seeds of light.
And this is a special time.
And you are meant to be here.
And so what I received
is exactly what
I want to share with
you, which is, first,
just welcome from the
first peoples here.
I'm Nahua on my mother's side,
which people know as Aztec.
And on my father's
side, I'm Toltec.
And I'm still learning about
myself because I also have just
a few years ago did my 23andMe.
And I found out that 15%
of me is from the Amazon.
And since 2007, I've been
leading groups there every year.
I never knew why.
But we all know inside of
each of us is our ancestors.
So welcome from the people,
the first peoples who
cared for this land,
this beauty that you're
experiencing, that you're here.
That is the people of
the Cheyenne, the Ute,
and the Arapaho.
And they are still here.
They are not gone.
And so every day,
I give gratitude.
And I invite you to give
gratitude, as you already are--
and you've been here
for a number of days--
to this land, this mother Earth.
And as I walk up--
I live in North Boulder in
the foothills for 43 years.
And as I walk that, I listen
and listen and listen.
And as I listen, I could hear
through the winds the sound.
And about six years ago, all
of a sudden, it became a song.
And then, I realized
it wasn't a song.
It was a chant.
It was a chant from
all our relatives.
And when I say
all our relatives,
that's not only two-legged human
beings, but for all the beings--
the four-leggeds, all
the minerals, the water,
the creepy crawlers, the
winged ones, the dragonflies.
All of this are our relatives.
So I'm going to say, do a
chant to the four directions.
And what I invite you
to do is to listen
with the softest part of your
ears and your expanding heart.
And then, after that,
I'll share what the sun
told me to share with you.
So to the east,
the red direction,
the keepers of the earth.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
Gratitude.
And to the south, the yellow
direction, the keepers
of the air, the wind.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
Gratitude.
And to the west,
the black direction,
the keepers of the water.
Water is life.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
Gratitude.
And to the north,
the white direction,
the keepers of the fire.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
Gratitude.
And the hoop is
only complete when
we have all the colors
and all the directions.
Go ahead and take a deep breath.
I can see that your
hearts are expanding
and just continue to lift with
the softest part of your ears.
And as I receive the seeds
of light this morning,
the sun said, share this story.
And I'm going to make
it a very short story.
But it's a story of my
grandmother on my mother's side.
And I loved being with
my Nahua grandmother.
And we'd go there
sometimes on weekends.
And so I was four.
My older sister was seven.
My little sister was three.
And we went.
And she was going
to do something
different this weekend.
She said, Saturday,
I'm going to wake--
we're going to wake up
before the sun rises.
And we're going
out to my garden.
And every hour on Saturday, I'm
going to bring you out here.
And you need to be
quiet for five minutes.
So we love our grandmothers,
so we all did it, right?
And so we went out.
And then, we stood by
her garden where there's
mirasols, which is sunflowers.
And so as you can
imagine, we stood there.
And what did the sunflowers do?
They looked to the sun.
So every hour, she'd bring
us from whatever we're doing.
We'd come back,
and we were quiet.
And we realized we were moving
with the sunflowers all day
long.
And I will tell
you, by lunchtime,
even though I was that young,
I didn't want to go to lunch.
I wanted to go back
to the sunflowers.
I think you all have
that feeling at times
to be in nature,
which we are part of.
And so we did that.
And then, at the end of
the day, it was dark.
And she said, we have
to go in to dinner.
So we go have dinner.
My grandmother never
debriefed anything
that she had us experience
because she trusted our wisdom
and trusted that we still
were aware there were part
of the earth and not separate.
We're part of all of our
relations and not separate.
And so after we finished,
it was pitch black--
Midwest Missouri.
And she took a flashlight.
She didn't turn it on.
And she said, come on.
And we're like, it's
really dark out there.
So we go out, and I guess
she takes us somewhere
near her garden again.
And she goes, hush,
so we're all quiet.
She turns a light on the
ground, and we can see.
We're all circled,
facing each other.
And then, she puts
the flashlight over
to her sunflower garden.
And all the sunflowers
are looking at each other.
And that's what the sun
wanted me to share with you.
You people who are so special,
you are gathering and putting
out the word of well-being.
And that even in the darkest
dark, when we were out there
and couldn't see, what
she showed us as we
were looking to each other--
the light that is
always within us.
But when we looked
at sunflowers,
nature also does that.
So it's to not forget
is the message.
And that while
you're here, fill up
because the original
instruction has always
been to be a life-giving
member of the one hoop of life
is to care for one's self, love
one's self, and care and love
for all our other relations.
[NON-ENGLISH]
Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]